let's agree for the sake of the next
conversation that Donald Trump uses the
most colorful language of any president
at least in the modern era and says some
of the most questionable things and that
is where our next guest comes in John
McWhorter is a linguist he has a PhD in
the field he teaches at Columbia and he
has written extensively and he too is
colorful when talking about Donald Trump
and specifically how this president
talks that's why we talked about it with
John McWhorter professor thank you for
joining us
Thank You Bryan I've been wanting to ask
you what is your linguistics definition
of this president Donald Trump
linguistically is unadorned this is the
basics this is what language was
undoubtedly like when it first emerged
among people who didn't have writing and
we're first getting their verbal sealegs
this is where it started and so in that
way as in so many others Donald Trump is
an original that would mean that
education and schooling has had no
effect on his use of language he's quick
to remind us that he went to the best
schools mhm and he learned nothing in
them he speaks like someone who paid no
attention to one of the goals of
education which is to refine our natural
inborn proclivities of speech which are
great for casual circumstances but he
uses those same ways of speaking and
what most of us used to consider formal
and important circumstances I think in
your line of work they call it a tag
when something is added to the end of
the traditional sentence so often he
will tag a sentence with believe me
believe me and enforce her something he
thought was lacking in the original
sentence mhm it's that he's reinforcing
and also he's using oral speech where
what we're always doing is we're
checking to see that the other person
understands what we're saying that
they're in the same boat that we are so
that's what you know is that's what
things like lol can be in texting he
does that too
but once again it's not in texting he's
doing it in formal circumstances which
means that he never leaves the realm of
the casual when he speaks which is
unlike even say indigenous societies
where there's no such thing as reading
or writing yet there's always a high way
of talking and a low way of talking the
chief doesn't just get up and run his
mouth ours does there's a friend of our
broadcast Eli chuckles who works for The
Wall Street Journal who has covered him
now for some time and says about Donald
Trump there are visual and audio tells
that he peppers his speech with where if
you know what's coming you know what's
coming I want to run a montage of a
Trump phrase people don't know and in
Eli Stone Cole's reading of it people
don't know for Donald Trump means I just
learned here's the examples France is
America's first and oldest ally a lot of
people don't know that our first
Republican President Abraham Lincoln ran
his first campaign for public office in
1832 great president most people don't
even know he was a Republican right does
anyone know a lot of people don't know
that people don't realize we are an
unbelievably divided country but now I
have to tell you it's an unbelievably
complex subject nobody knew that health
care could be so complicated
so you're laughing why well
that aspect of him I can't say anything
particularly linguistic about it it's
because he has this need to be the alpha
male that business of most people don't
know this is coming from that same well
the idea is that he's always the one
who's one step ahead and in that frankly
I don't find him linguistically
challenged as much as just somebody
who's rather oddly adolescent for
somebody who's a senior citizen what
about his other favorites believe me and
more than ever before or more than we've
ever seen before
well some of that is because they're
really only I I'm sorry to say it but
there are only so many thoughts and so
often he's speaking and I think he runs
out of new in
it's and so he covers it with things
like believe me or it can't ever be that
something is that it's very bad or very
very bad
those are his equivalents of roughly um
or scratching his head I think that
often the content of what he's saying is
much slimmer than the bulk the bow kids
of the verbiage that he spews out he's
71 years old he is now president in an
age of instantaneous real-time
fact-checking he is not used to his kind
of ad-libs superlatives being fact
checked in real-time do you think he's
bumped up against that dynamic yeah it's
unfortunate because I don't think he's
gonna change in that way he simply has
no deodorant wearing Sunday best way of
speaking and that includes that you have
to have a more responsible sense of
truth than when you're just biessing
with your pals when we speak casually
all the time we say things where maybe
if we checked up on it things might be
different he doesn't understand that if
you're President of the United States
you can't just talk it looks like you're
just talking because you're moving your
mouth and vibrating your vocal cords but
there's this other art that you're
supposed to master he wasn't interested
in that sort of thing say in school this
is somebody who is numb to the artful he
has a rather narcotic joy in dismissal
and belittlement rather than building
and decorating and so he's going to keep
running up against that wall he doesn't
understand that when you're president
you have to think about things such as
what we might call truth conditions in
linguistics is what you're describing
the intersection of narcissism and
linguistics that is beautifully put he
is what happens when you get somebody
who is extremely artful and also I think
it's safe to say I don't think he's
insane but clinically narcissistic and
talking all the time to us in our houses
about serious things
and that's what's so striking about
listening to this person talk what's
unfortunate is how much we've had to
listen to it but I don't think that we
should be under any impression that it's
going to change because we're in an
informal era in a way he's a product of
something that's been going on since the
mid 60s and in many ways it's in good
ways the fact that in America you and I
both would have had to wear worn fedoras
and suits even on hot summer days thank
god that's gone but something else that
left was the sense that you put speech
in it's Sunday best
all of us nowadays at least fake it to
an extent but we could have predicted
that somebody was going to come along
who really just didn't even bother to do
anything but talk rather than speak and
could even become president of the
United States I don't think that Trump
is gonna be last in that regard the
oratorical regard hopefully the other
things but oratorical II he's the
beginning of something new hey there I'm
Chris Hayes from MSNBC thanks for
watching MSNBC on YouTube if you want to
keep up to date with the videos we're
putting out you can click subscribe just
below me or click over on this list to
see lots of other great videos